PKI SCEP documentation updates (#30753)
hashicorp/vault: website/content/docs/secrets/pki/scep.mdx

---
layout: docs
page_title: Simple Certificate Enrollment Protocol (SCEP)
description: >-

>    Understand the configuration and limitations of Vault's PKI secrets engine implementation of the Simple Certificate Enrollment Protocol (SCEP).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Configure the PKI plugin to work with Simple Certificate Enrollment Protocol (SCEP).
```

---

> # Simple Certificate Enrollment Protocol (SCEP) <EnterpriseAlert inline="true" />

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Configure a Simple Certificate Enrollment Protocol (SCEP)

@include 'alerts/enterprise-only.mdx'
```

Reviewer: The doc is basically a how-to guide, so we should frame the title to reflect that fact

> This document covers configuration and limitations of Vault's PKI Secrets Engine
> implementation of the [SCEP](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8894) <EnterpriseAlert inline="true" />.
> 
> ## What is Simple Certificate Enrollment Protocol (SCEP)?
> 
> SCEP is an IETF standardized protocol, [RFC 8894](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8894),
> that allows clients to acquire client certificates and associated
> Certificate Authority (CA) certificates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SCEP is an IETF standardized protocol ([RFC 8894](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8894))
that allows clients to acquire client certificates and associated
Certificate Authority (CA) certificates. You can configure the PKI plugin to
use [SCEP](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8894) authentication.
```

We can simplify things by folding the first section into the page intro

## Enabling SCEP support on a Vault PKI mount

The following is a list of steps required to configure an existing PKI
mount to serve SCEP clients. Each of which can be broken down within three main
categories.

>  1. [Authentication mechanisms](#configuring-scep-authentication-mounts)
>  2. [Updating PKI tunable parameters](#updating-the-pki-mount-tunable-parameters)
>  3. [PKI SCEP configuration](#pki-scep-configuration)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 1. [Configure an authentication mechanisms](#configuring-scep-authentication-mounts)
 1. [Tune your PKI parameters](#updating-the-pki-mount-tunable-parameters)
 1. [Configure your SCEP roles](#pki-scep-configuration)
```

> ## Enabling SCEP support on a Vault PKI mount
> 
> The following is a list of steps required to configure an existing PKI
> mount to serve SCEP clients. Each of which can be broken down within three main
> categories.
> 
>  1. [Authentication mechanisms](#configuring-scep-authentication-mounts)
>  2. [Updating PKI tunable parameters](#updating-the-pki-mount-tunable-parameters)
>  3. [PKI SCEP configuration](#pki-scep-configuration)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```suggestion

## Before your start

- **You must have Vault 1.20 or later**.
- **You must use the `static-challenge` authentication type to work with JAMF Pro.**
- **To use multiple authentication methods, you must have separate PKI mounts**.
  The SCEP implementation only allows one type of challenge authentication for
  a given PKI mount. If you require multiple authentication methods, you msut
  create separate PKI mounts, that point to either a shared SCEP auth mount or
  separate SCEP auth mounts.
```
```

Author: I'll accept this suggestion but will tweak it a little bit afterwards, replace your with you and will add Enterprise after Vault

## Before you start
- **You must have Vault Enterprise 1.20 or later**.

> ### Configuring SCEP Authentication mounts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Step 1: Determine your authentication methods
```

The Vault SCEP implementation supports a few different authentication mechanisms in
two categories.

 1. Challenge Based authentication

>    2. [Intune authentication](/vault/docs/auth/scep)

Reviewer 2: The nested bullet points were not rendered correctly:
<img width="319" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/f89f1d1d-824a-4460-8c38-dfeb8acf1253" />

   2. [Static challenge authentication](/vault/docs/auth/scep)
 1. [Certificate Authentication](/vault/docs/auth/cert)

For SCEP challenge based authentication one of either static challenge or InTune mechanisms
can be used to authenticate clients within a given PKI mount. This is controlled
by configuring Intune within the PKI mount's SCEP configuration, otherwise we fallback
to using static challenges.

> Certificate authentication can be used, although optional, for requests without

Reviewer 2: What about something like:

> Certificate authentication can optionally be used for requests without...

a challenge value. This is useful for clients that are renewing their certificate without
requiring the original challenge value.

The static challenge and InTune authentication mechanisms use a dedicated SCEP
authentication mount within the same namespace, while the certificate authentication
mechanism uses a configured certificate authentication mount. Both of these mounts
are used to validate the client provided credentials along with the client's ACL policy.

For proper accounting, mounts supporting SCEP authentication should be

> dedicated to this purpose, not shared with other workflows.  In other words,

Reviewer 2: Suggestion:
> ... to this purpose, and should not be shared with ...

create a new auth mount for SCEP even if you already have one of the same
type for other purposes.

When setting up the authentication mount for SCEP clients, the token type must
be configured to return [batch tokens](/vault/docs/concepts/tokens#batch-tokens).
Batch tokens are required to avoid an excessive amount of leases being generated
and persisted as every SCEP incoming request needs to be authenticated.

If using the `sign-verbatim` or `role:my-role-name` as a path policy, the following
ACL policy will allow an authenticated client access the required PKI SCEP paths.
```
path “pki/scep” {
  capabilities=[“read“, “update”, “create”]
}
path “pki/scep/pkiclient.exe” {
  capabilities=[“read“, “update”, “create”]
}
```

For a role base path policy, this sample policy can be used
```
path “pki/roles/my-role-name/scep” {
  capabilities=[“read“, “update”, “create”]
}
path “pki/roles/my-role-name/scep/pkiclient.exe” {
  capabilities=[“read“, “update”, “create”]
}
```

> ##### Sample SCEP Authentication Mounts

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
##### Sample SCEP authentication mounts
```

```shell-session
$ vault auth enable scep
$ vault write auth/scep/role/static-challenge-1 \
      auth_type="static-challenge" \
      challenge=${SCEP_PASS} \
      token_policies="access-scep" \
      token_type="batch"
```

```shell-session
$ vault auth enable cert
$ vault write auth/cert/certs/scep-ca \
      display_name="SCEP Client CA" \
      token_policies="access-scep" \
      certificate="${CERTIFICATE}" \
      token_type="batch" \
      allowed_common_names="${HOSTNAME}"
```

```shell-session
$ vault write auth/scep/role/intune \
     auth_type="intune" \
     token_policies="access-scep" \
     token_type="batch"
```

> #### Updating the PKI mount tunable parameters

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Step 2: Tune your PKI mount parameters
```

Once the authentication mount has been created and configured, the authentication mount's accessor
will need to be captured and added within the PKI mount's [delegated auth accessors](/vault/api-docs/system/mounts#delegated_auth_accessors).

To get an authentication mount's accessor field, the following command can be used.

```shell-session
$ vault read -field=accessor sys/auth/scep
$ vault read -field=accessor sys/auth/cert
```

These field accessors are then added to the mount's delegated auth accessors.

```shell-session
$ vault secrets tune \
  -delegated-auth-accessors="auth_scep_e2f4f6d5" \
  -delegated-auth-accessors="auth_cert_4088ac2d" \
  pki
```

> #### PKI SCEP configuration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Step 3: Configure your SCEP authentication mount
```

The following is an example of a complete SCEP configuration, with two different authentication

> methods - using certificate authentication and a static secret scep authentication.

Reviewer 2: `scep` should be all uppercase here.

    },
    "cert": {
      "accessor": "${CERT_ACCESSOR}",
      "cert_role": "scep-ca"
    }
  }
}
EOC
```

#### PKI SCEP configuration with Intune

The following is an example of a complete SCEP configuration using Intune authentication. Note that the
SCEP auth mount must have a role configured with an auth_type of `intune`. For the Intune authentication
credentials within the PKI mount's SCEP configuration, the tenant ID, client ID, and client secret can be
provided as environment variables, leverage Azure managed identities, or hardcoded into the configuration.
Note that all the `intune` specific fields within the `external_validation` block also accept using
[indirect value references](/vault/docs/configuration/seal#indirect-value-references)

```shell-session
vault write pki_int/config/scep -<<EOC
{
  "enabled": true,
  "default_path_policy": "role:scep-clients",
  "authenticators": {
    "scep": {
      "accessor": "${SCEP_ACCESSOR}",
      "scep_role": "intune"
    }
  }
  "external_validation": {
    "intune": {
      "tenant_id": "${INTUNE_TENANT_ID}",
      "client_id": "${INTUNE_CLIENT_ID}",
      "client_secret": "${INTUNE_CLIENT_SECRET}"
    }
  }
}
```

> 

Author: Weird, resolving this suggestion as it seems GH didn't remove it when I committed it (the contents are below)

> ## Limitations
> 
> The SCEP implementation as noted above allow one type of challenge authentication, so either static challenge or Intune
> for a given PKI mount. If you require both authentication methods, you will need to create separate PKI mounts, that
> can point to either a shared SCEP auth mount or separate SCEP auth mounts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Folded into "Before you start"

### Matching different static challenge values

> It is possible for a PKI mount to use different static challenge values from a PKI mount. The SCEP auth

Reviewer 2: I think the last "... from a PKI mount." is not necessary?

mount will need multiple roles configured of `auth_type` `static-challenge`, each with a different `challenge` value.

> Within the PKI mount's SCEP configuration, the `scep_role` field will need to be left blank. With that the login

Reviewer 2: For the last sentence, maybe something like:
> With that set up the PKI mount login attempt will be tried against the various SCEP auth roles.

mount login attempt will be tried against the various SCEP auth roles.

### Intune support

Intune clients add an additional `/pkiclient.exe` path to the configured SCEP request. Make sure that
the access policies associated with the SCEP role within the SCEP auth mount provide access to this path, such as

```hcl
path “pki/scep” {
  capabilities=[“read“, “update”, “create”]
}
path “pki/scep/pkiclient.exe” {
  capabilities=[“read“, “update”, “create”]
}
```

During internal testing, we noticed Intune clients would fail to match the CA certificate when the GetCACerts request
returned a full certificate chain instead of the issuer CA certificate by itself. If you experience this issue, you
can force the SCEP response to only return the issuer CA certificate by setting the `restrict_ca_chain_to_issuer` field to `true`
within the PKI mount's SCEP configuration.

> ### JAMF Pro support
> 
> JAMF Pro is supported in the static secret configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Folded into "Before you start"

> ## API

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Resources
```

> The PKI secrets engine has a full HTTP API. Please see the
> [PKI secrets engine API](/vault/api-docs/secret/pki) for more details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [PKI secrets engine API](/vault/api-docs/secret/pki) documentation.
```
